fips: add docs about MD5 access (#2722)
chainguard-dev/edu: content/chainguard/fips/non-approved-algorithms.md

---

> title: "FIPS and non-approved algorithms"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "FIPS and Non-Approved Algorithms"
```

> linktitle: "FIPS and MD5"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
linktitle: "FIPS and non-approved algorithms"
```

(same)

> linktitle: "FIPS and non-approved algorithms"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linktitle: "FIPS and Non-Approved Algorithms"
```

type: "article"
description: "Technical deep-dive into Chainguard FIPS images access to non-approved algorithms such as MD5 and SHA1"
date: 2025-10-28T08:00:00+00:00
lastmod: 2025-10-28T08:00:00+00:00
draft: false
tags: ["FIPS", "MD5"]
images: []
weight: 040
toc: true
---

## Overview

FIPS cryptographic modules implement cryptographically strong protection of data at rest and in transit. The NIST position on this is very [clear](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program):

> Non-validated cryptography is viewed as providing no protection to the information or data — in effect the data would be considered unprotected plaintext. If the agency specifies that the information or data be cryptographically protected, then FIPS 140-2 or FIPS 140-3 is applicable. In essence, if cryptography is required, then it must be validated. Should the cryptographic module be revoked, use of that module is no longer permitted.

## NIST guidance on non-approved algorithm usage

> As part of FIPS collection of publications, NIST publishes [FIPS 140-3 Implementation Guidance](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/fips-140-3-ig-announcements) (FIPS 140 I.G.). The Cryptogrpahic Module Validation Programme (CMVP) requirements for the FIPS 140-3 include ISO standards, SP 800 series documents as well as the FIPS 140-3 I.G. The full set of documents and diagram are shown [here](https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/fips-140-3-standards).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As part of the FIPS collection of publications, NIST publishes [FIPS 140-3 Implementation Guidance](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/fips-140-3-ig-announcements) (FIPS 140 I.G.). The Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP) requirements for the FIPS 140-3 include ISO standards, SP 800 series documents as well as the FIPS 140-3 I.G. The full set of documents and diagram are shown [here](https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/fips-140-3-standards).
```

> As part of the FIPS collection of publications, NIST publishes [FIPS 140-3 Implementation Guidance](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/fips-140-3-ig-announcements) (FIPS 140 I.G.). The Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP) requirements for the FIPS 140-3 include ISO standards, SP 800 series documents as well as the FIPS 140-3 I.G. The full set of documents and diagram are shown [here](https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/fips-140-3-standards).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of the FIPS collection of publications, NIST publishes [FIPS 140-3 Implementation Guidance](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/fips-140-3-ig-announcements) (FIPS 140 I.G.). The Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP) requirements for the FIPS 140-3 include ISO standards, SP 800 series documents as well as the FIPS 140-3 I.G. The full set of documents and diagram are available from the [NIST Information Technology Laboratory Computer Security Resource Center](https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/fips-140-3-standards).
```

Skipping to additional comments, let's focus on these statements (current edition, see the current [FIPS 140-3 I.G.](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/fips-140-3-ig-announcements) for any changes).

### FIPS 140-3 I.G. 2.4.A Additional comment

The vendor must provide clear documentation and reasoning as to why the non-approved cryptographic algorithms can be used in an approved mode, i.e., not being used to meet the requirements of FIPS 140-3 sections 6 and 7. It is at the discretion of the CMVP to determine if such usage of an algorithm fits within the guidance laid out in this IG.

In addition, attempts to make use of this IG to include algorithms in the approved mode will not be accepted unless all of the following are met:

1) the algorithm is not used whatsoever to meet any FIPS 140-3 requirements;
1) the algorithm does not access or share CSPs in a way that counters the requirements of this IG;
1) the algorithm is either:
   1) not intended to be used as a security function (e.g. interoperability or for memory wear leveling);
   1) redundant to an approved algorithm (e.g. double encryption);

>    1) a cryptographic or mathematical operation applied for “good measure” but not for providing sound security (e.g. XORing a CSP with a secret value, using a proprietary algorithm, or using non-approved algorithms to obfuscate stored CSPs which are considered plaintext);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1) a cryptographic or mathematical operation applied for “good measure” but not for providing sound security (that is XORing a CSP with a secret value, using a proprietary algorithm, or using non-approved algorithms to obfuscate stored CSPs which are considered plaintext);
```

All cases of usage that might be related to a security function also are made to use approved only services, this includes but not limited to:

* encryption / decryption
* digital signature creation and verfication
* random number generation
* message authentication code
* key derivation functions
* key encapsulation methods
* key exchange

The one functionality that errs on the side of non-security function is calculating a digest alone, not part of MAC, HMAC, merkle-tree, integrity scheme, or digital signatures. Specificaly, MD4, MD5, and SHA1 are universally deprecated and dissallowed as part of security schemes, and yet they remain widely used for non-security functionality.

Examples of such non-security usage are:

> * Webpack 4 uses MD4 to precompute perfect hashtables from trusted input at build time [issue](https://github.com/webpack/webpack/issues/14560)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Webpack 4 uses MD4 to precompute perfect hashtables from trusted input at build time, see [issue](https://github.com/webpack/webpack/issues/14560).
```

* Amazon S3 supports many algorithms for object integrity checking over trusted channel, including MD5 and SHA1 [docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/checking-object-integrity-upload.html). Many client implementations default to MD5.
* Google Bucket storage can use CRC32C or MD5, and clients typically default to MD5 for object integrity during uploads [docs](https://docs.cloud.google.com/storage/docs/data-validation)
* PDF document identifiers require MD5 by standard, and no newer version of standard exist.

> In all of the above use cases digest calculation does not provide any security functionality, it is meant to detect accidental corruption or provide speed ups. Overall, data is typically protected by SHA2-256 and is transmitted over a secure and authenticated TLS channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In all of the above use cases digest calculation does not provide any security functionality, it is meant to detect accidental corruption or improve speed. Overall, data is typically protected by SHA2-256 and is transmitted over a secure and authenticated TLS channel.
```

One alternative to migrating away from MD5 is to choose a specialist function explicitely designed for non-security purposes with significantly higher performace, such as [XXHASH](https://xxhash.com/). In most cases, non-security functionality should upgrade from CRC32C, MD5, SHA1 to XXHASH3.

> However, if you need interoperability with existing formats and services **and** it is established that digest usage is for non-security purposes, you must use the insecure digests. Chainguard is integrating support for such use cases for MD5 and SHA1 across our FIPS images. Each language and application implementation is very different and specific, documented below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if you need interoperability with existing formats and services *and* it is established that digest usage is for non-security purposes, you must use the insecure digests. Chainguard is integrating support for such use cases for MD5 and SHA1 across our FIPS images. Each language and application implementation is very different and specific, documented below.
```

Although SHA1 is currently approved, it is already deprecated by RFCs. NIST is deprecating SHA1 by 2030.  The implementations below are forward-looking and attempt to address access to MD5 today and SHA1 in the future.

> SHA1 is available as approved in Chainguard FIPS Provider for OpenSSL versions 3.0.9, 3.1.2 and 3.4.0. It is non-approved starting in version 3.6.0. The below guidance will apply to SHA1 as well likely in 2027.

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to be more specific about the "likely in 2027" part? As in something with compliance is changing?

```suggestion
SHA1 is available as approved in Chainguard FIPS Provider for OpenSSL versions 3.0.9, 3.1.2 and 3.4.0. It is non-approved starting in version 3.6.0. The below guidance will apply to SHA1 as well, likely beginning in 2027.
```

> ## Access to MD5 for non-security purposes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Access to unapproved algorithms for non-security purposes
```

change to allow expansion into SHA1 and otehrwise make it non-specific about MD5 as time goes on

Examples:

```shell
$ echo chainguard | openssl dgst -md5
Error setting digest
801B3D417B7F0000:error:0308010C:digital envelope routines:inner_evp_generic_fetch:unsupported:crypto/evp/evp_fetch.c:375:Global default library context, Algorithm (MD5 : 89), Properties ()
801B3D417B7F0000:error:03000086:digital envelope routines:evp_md_init_internal:initialization error:crypto/evp/digest.c:271:
```

```shell
$ printf chainguard | openssl dgst -propquery '?fips=yes' -md5
MD5(stdin)= f8d689ee8221617c032b0e71f9c597ac
```

Note that calculating HMAC is still blocked:

```shell
$ printf chainguard | openssl dgst -propquery '?fips=yes' -md5 -hmac averylonghmackey
Error setting context
80AB9D605C7F0000:error:0308010C:digital envelope routines:inner_evp_generic_fetch:unsupported:crypto/evp/evp_fetch.c:341:FIPS internal library context, Algorithm (md5 : 0), Properties (<null>)
```

> There are some caveats and bypasses, some digital signature algorithms allow signing raw data, or prehashed values. In such cases, one can out of band calculate MD5 hash, padded it according to PKCSv1.5 and RSA2048 modulus size and execute raw RSA signing operation. Such a service is non-approved, and is unable to know that it is abused to sign an MD5 hash instead of SHA256. Please don't do this (your FIPS auditors will make you change it). Higher level one shot EVP APIs typically accept a message to sign, and perform hashing and padding internally and correctly block creating MD5 signatures. This again highlights that FIPS is about consent, one has to try to use FIPS cryptography intentionally.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are some caveats and bypasses, some digital signature algorithms allow signing raw data, or prehashed values. In such cases, one can calculate MD5 hash out of band, pad it according to PKCSv1.5 and RSA2048 modulus size and execute raw RSA signing operation. Such a service is non-approved, and it is not possible to know that it is being abused to sign an MD5 hash instead of SHA256. _Please don't do this_ (your FIPS auditors will require that you change it). Higher level one-shot EVP APIs typically accept a message to sign, and perform hashing and padding internally and correctly block creating MD5 signatures. This again highlights that FIPS is about consent, one should use FIPS cryptography intentionally.
```

If there is C/C++ software that uses OpenSSL APIs and needs access to MD5 and doesn't support `-fips` property query string, please [open a support request](https://support.chainguard.dev/) for Chainguard engineering to look into adding support.

### Python FIPS and MD5

The Python standard library has a keyword argument to specify using a digest for security purposes, see these [docs](https://docs.python.org/3/library/hashlib.html#hashlib.md5).

Here are examples:

```python
>>> import hashlib
>>> hashlib.md5(b"chainguard").hexdigest()
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<python-input-12>", line 1, in <module>
    hashlib.md5(b"chainguard").hexdigest()
    ~~~~~~~~~~~^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
_hashlib.UnsupportedDigestmodError: [digital envelope routines] unsupported
```

```python
>>> hashlib.md5(b"chainguard", usedforsecurity=False).hexdigest()
'f8d689ee8221617c032b0e71f9c597ac'
```

If this usage is needed in any of the imported libraries, you can use [mock](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.mock.html#where-to-patch) techniques to patch the code to pass the correct argument.

> Alternatively submit upstream fixes to correct the code. Here are some examples contributed by Chainguardians:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, submit upstream fixes to correct the code. Here are some examples contributed by Chainguard engineers:
```

> * Google Cloud Platform storage [pull request](https://github.com/googleapis/python-storage/pull/1522)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Google Cloud Platform storage pull request](https://github.com/googleapis/python-storage/pull/1522)
```

> * PyPDF project [pull requst](https://github.com/py-pdf/pypdf/pull/3438)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [PyPDF project pull requst](https://github.com/py-pdf/pypdf/pull/3438)
```

* The [go-msft-fips](https://images.chainguard.dev/directory/image/go-msft-fips/overview) image always blocks MD5 usage.

There are a few codepaths in the Go standard library where MD5 is used for authentication. Chainguard is working to correctly block these, and unify the two toolchains into one.

### Java FIPS and MD5

Currently all Java FIPS implementations in Chainguard FIPS images are powered by BouncyCastle FIPS as a JAR on the module path. This currently requires loading Sun crypto provider which currently always allows MD5.

Chainguard is working on using jlink to integrate BouncyCastle FIPS into the runtime image, to eliminate the Sun dependency. Then it will be possible to control MD5 access with BouncyCastle specific security properties. This guidance will be updated when the situation changes.

If blocking behavior is required, ensure to request implementation from the `BCFIPS` provider, or check for `BCFIPS` provider, as it has higest priority in the `java.security` hardened configuration.

### Node FIPS and MD5

Currently under investigation.

### PostgreSQL and MD5

Currently under investigation.

## All other projects

> If you have queries about this guidance, or any other packages, projects, languages or ecosystems, click "No" below and fill in feedback, or please open a support ticket.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have queries about this guidance, or any other packages, projects, languages or ecosystems, click "No" below and fill in feedback, or please [open a support ticket](https://support.chainguard.dev/).
```

add link 💞
